README.md, before:

# YIO Remote OS Repository

For details about the YIO Remote, please visit our documentation repository which can be found under
<https://github.com/YIO-Remote/documentation>

This repository contains the custom Linux OS built with [buildroot](https://www.buildroot.org/) for the YIO Remote.

## Build

Requirements:

- Preferably a Linux box or VM.
- At least 20 GB of free space.
- At least 4 GB RAM. More RAM = better file system caching.
- Fast CPU with many cores for quicker build times.
- SSD is highly recommended.
- Internet connection: packages will be downloaded during the build.
- 1+ GB microSD card
  - Future images might be larger!
  - Recommended card: Samsung EVO Plus (64 and 128GB have much higher write speed!)
  - See: [RPi microSD card performance comparison 2019](https://www.jeffgeerling.com/blog/2019/raspberry-pi-microsd-card-performance-comparison-2019)

### Docker

See [Docker Readme](docker/README.md).

### Linux Ubuntu 18.04.3 or newer

#### Prepare Build Environment

- If you just need a headless build VM then use the minimal [Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS Server](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/releases/18.04.3/release/) version.
- Some packages might already be installed depending on the version (desktop or server).

Install required tools:

1. Prepare Ubuntu for buildroot:

        sudo apt-get install \
          build-essential \
          g++ \
          gettext \
          patch \
          git \
          libncurses5-dev \
          libtool \
          python \
          texinfo \
          unzip

2. Optional: convenient packages for development

        sudo apt-get install \
          mc \
          nano \
          screen

3. Optional: SSH server for remote access

        sudo apt-get install openssh-server

#### Initial Checkout

    SRC_DIR=~/projects/yio

    mkdir -p ${SRC_DIR}
    cd ${SRC_DIR}
    git clone https://github.com/YIO-Remote/remote-os.git
    
    # switch to development branch
    cd remote-os
    git checkout develop
    
    # checkout buildroot (Git submodule)
    git submodule init
    git submodule update

#### Build SD Card Image

    cd ${SRC_DIR}/remote-os/buildroot
    
    make defconfig BR2_DEFCONFIG=../yio_rpi0w_defconfig
    make

Hint: redirect the `make` output log into a logfile to easy find an error during building or when using `screen` without scrollback capability:

    make 2>&1 | tee ../buildlog-$(date +"%Y%m%d_%H%M%S").log

The built SD card image can be found at: `${SRC_DIR}/remote-os/buildroot/output/images/yio-remote-sdcard.img`

#### Buildroot Commands

TODO: shortly describe the main commands (menuconfig, clean, rebuild, etc.)

## Write SD Card Image

Use [balenaEtcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) - available for Linux, macOS and Windows - or your favorite tool.

## Technology Research

The following technologies were / are investigated for finding an easy and automated solution to build the RPi image.

### Vagrant

Vagrant would be perfect for building the RPi image. Everything could be automated and one would only have to type `vagrant up`.

Found issues so far:

- Almost all official Linux boxes have a 'small' 10 GB disk:
  - Not enough to build the image.
  - No standard way of extending the disk, or limited to one virtualization provider.
  - Synced folders don't work because of hard links
- Serious issues with VirtualBox 6 in combination with newer Ubuntu images
  - Bootup takes 5+ minutes instead of seconds
  - Issue is something with the UART console

TODO:

- [ ] Search for suitable official Box with at least 20 GB volume
- [ ] Investigate further...

Commit message:

Initial release of Docker build image (#17)
- Wrapper script for host
- Fixes and enhancements in build script
- Improved documentation

This is the initial release and closes #17 and #4

README.md, after:

# YIO Remote OS Repository

For details about the YIO Remote, please visit our documentation wiki: <https://github.com/YIO-Remote/documentation>

This repository contains the custom Linux OS built with [buildroot](https://www.buildroot.org/) for the YIO Remote.

## Build

Requirements:

- A Linux box or VM, otherwise Docker.
- At least 20 GB of free space.
- At least 4 GB RAM. More RAM = better file system caching.
- Fast CPU with many cores for quicker build times.
- SSD is highly recommended.
- Internet connection: packages will be downloaded during the build.
- 1+ GB microSD card
  - Future images might be larger!
  - Recommended card: Samsung EVO Plus (64 and 128GB have much higher write speed!)
  - See: [RPi microSD card performance comparison 2019](https://www.jeffgeerling.com/blog/2019/raspberry-pi-microsd-card-performance-comparison-2019)

### Docker

See [Docker Readme](docker/README.md).

### Linux Ubuntu 18.04.3 or newer

#### Prepare Build Environment

- If you just need a headless build VM then use the minimal [Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS Server](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/releases/18.04.3/release/) version.
- Some packages might already be installed depending on the version (desktop or server).

Install required tools:

1. Prepare Ubuntu for Buildroot:

        sudo apt-get install \
          build-essential \
          g++ \
          gettext \
          patch \
          git \
          libncurses5-dev \
          libtool \
          python \
          texinfo \
          unzip

1. Optional: Packages for Qt development

        sudo apt-get install --no-install-recommends \
            qttools5-dev-tools

1. Optional: convenient packages for development

        sudo apt-get install \
          mc \
          nano \
          screen

1. Optional: SSH server for remote access

        sudo apt-get install openssh-server

#### Initial Checkout

    SRC_DIR=~/projects/yio

    mkdir -p ${SRC_DIR}
    cd ${SRC_DIR}
    git clone https://github.com/YIO-Remote/remote-os.git
    
    # switch to development branch
    cd remote-os
    git checkout develop
    
    # checkout buildroot (Git submodule)
    git submodule init
    git submodule update

#### Build SD Card Image

    cd ${SRC_DIR}/remote-os/buildroot
    
    make defconfig BR2_DEFCONFIG=../yio_rpi0w_defconfig
    make

Hint: redirect the `make` output log into a logfile to easy find an error during building or when using `screen` without scrollback capability:

    make 2>&1 | tee ../buildlog-$(date +"%Y%m%d_%H%M%S").log

The built SD card image can be found at: `${SRC_DIR}/remote-os/buildroot/output/images/yio-remote-sdcard.img`

#### Buildroot Commands

TODO: shortly describe the main commands (menuconfig, clean, rebuild, etc.)

## Write SD Card Image

Use [balenaEtcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) - available for Linux, macOS and Windows - or your favorite tool.

## Technology Research

The following technologies were / are investigated for finding an easy and automated solution to build the RPi image.

### Vagrant

Vagrant would be perfect for building the RPi image. Everything could be automated and one would only have to type `vagrant up`.

Found issues so far:

- Almost all official Linux boxes have a 'small' 10 GB disk:
  - Not enough to build the image.
  - No standard way of extending the disk, or limited to one virtualization provider.
  - Synced folders don't work because of hard links
- Serious issues with VirtualBox 6 in combination with newer Ubuntu images
  - Bootup takes 5+ minutes instead of seconds
  - Issue is something with the UART console

TODO:

- [ ] Search for suitable official Box with at least 20 GB volume
- [ ] Investigate further...
